---
key:    WLB15
kind:   inproceedings
author: "Kunshan Wang, Yi Lin, Stephen M Blackburn, Michael Norrish and Antony L Hosking"
title:  "Draining the Swamp: Micro Virtual Machines as Solid Foundation for Language Development"
in:     "1st Summit oN Advances in Programming Languages (SNAPL 2015)"
year:   2015
pdf:    "uvm-snapl-2015.pdf"
---

Many of today’s programming languages are broken. Poor performance, lack of
features and hard-to-reason-about semantics can cost dearly in software
maintenance and inefficient execution. The problem is only getting worse with
programming languages proliferating and hardware becoming more complicated.

An important reason for this brokenness is that much of language design is
implementation-driven. The difficulties in implementation and insufficient
understanding of concepts bake bad designs into the language itself.
Concurrency, architectural details and garbage collection are three fundamental
concerns that contribute much to the complexities of implementing managed
languages.

We propose the micro virtual machine, a thin abstraction designed
specifically to relieve implementers of managed languages of the most
fundamental implementation challenges that currently impede good design.  The
micro virtual machine targets abstractions over memory (garbage collection),
architecture (compiler backend), and concurrency. We motivate the micro virtual
machine and give an account of the design and initial experience of a concrete
instance, which we call Mu, built over a two year period. Our goal is to remove
an important barrier to performant and semantically sound managed language
design and implementation.
