---
key:    LWB15
kind:   inproceedings
author: "Yi Lin, Kunshan Wang, Stephen M Blackburn, Michael Norrish and Antony L Hosking"
title:  "Stop and Go: Understanding Yieldpoint Behavior"
in:     "Proceedings of the Fourteenth ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Memory Management (ISMM 2015), Portland, OR, June 14, 2015"
year:   2015
pdf:    "yieldpoint-ismm-2015.pdf"
---

Yieldpoints are critical to the implementation of high performance garbage
collected languages, yet the design space is not well understood.  Yieldpoints
allow a running program to be interrupted at well-defined points in its
execution, facilitating exact garbage collection, biased locking, on-stack
replacement, profiling, and other important virtual machine behaviors. In this
paper we identify and evaluate yieldpoint design choices, including previously
undocumented designs and optimizations. One of the designs we identify opens
new opportunities for very low overhead profiling. We measure the frequency
with which yieldpoints are executed and establish a methodology for evaluating
the common case execution time overhead. We also measure the median and worst
case time-to-yield. We find that Java benchmarks execute about 100 M
yieldpoints per second, of which about 1/20000 are taken. The average execution
time overhead for untaken yieldpoints on the VM we use ranges from 2.5% to
close to zero on modern hardware, depending on the design, and we find that the
designs trade off total overhead with worst case time-to-yield. This analysis
gives new insight into a critical but overlooked aspect of garbage collector
implementation, and identifies a new optimization and new opportunities for
very low overhead profiling.

